model/README.md, before:

# ICON4Py Model

This folder contains Python implementations for multiple ICON components.

It includes the following packages:

- `atmosphere/dycore`: Contains implementations of the dynamical core of the ICON model
- `atmosphere/diffusion`: Contains the implementation of diffusion in the ICON model
- `atmosphere/advection`: Contains implementations of the advection component of the ICON model
- `common`: Contains shared functionality that is required by multiple components.
- `driver`: Contains the driving code for the model

## Installation Instructions

You can follow the general installation instructions used for the entire icon4py repository, or install each namespace package within this folder independently using the individual folder-specific `requirements.txt` or `requirements-dev.txt` files.

In the following example it is assumed that you have already created and activated a virtual environment.

```bash
# changing into the corresponding directory
cd model/atmosphere/dycore
cd model/atmosphere/advection

# installing a development version
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

**Note**: For more information specific to each component, please refer to the README in their respective subfolders.

### Testing

See the repository [README](../README.md) for general information.

#### Unit tests for stencils
The `gt4py` stencils in the `icon4py-model` packages are used for integration into Fortran code
via [icon4pygen](../tools/src/icon4py/icon4pygen). To make integration easier
unit tests for the stencils need to be placed into
a `stencil_tests` subfolder of the packages test path. For example
```
model/atmosphere/diffusion/tests/stencil_tests
model/atmosphere/dycore/tests/stencil_tests
model/atmosphere/advection/tests/stencil_tests
model/common/tests/tests/stencil_tests
```

#### Data dependent tests

Some test depend on serialized data generated by a full model run. 
Those test are marked with `pytest.mark.datatest` and are only run when the `--datatest` 
option is specified. Note that due to `pytests` configuration discovery 
you need to specify the base a package directory i.e. one that contains a `pyproject.toml` for the 
commandline option to work.

```bash

pytest -v --datatest model/common
pytest -v --datatest model/atmosphere/diffusion
```

#### Testing parallel code
Icon4Py uses GHEX as communication library. It is an optional dependency of the model. In order to install and
run the parallel version do the following:

1. You need to have a MPI installation in your system, so do the following

```bash
sudo apt-get install libopenmpi-dev
```
or
```bash
sudo apt-get install mpich
```
On MacOS run 
```bash
brew install mpich
```
2. Install optional python libraries:
In the main folder of the repository run
```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev-opt.txt
```
Note that the current Python build for GHEX seems not to run on MacOS.

3. Run parallel tests
In order to run the parallel tests you need to specify specify the `--with-mpi` option to `pytest`
and _pass the exact folder location of the tests_ to `pytest`.


```bash
mpirun -np 4 pytest -v -s --with-mpi --datatest model/atmosphere/diffusion/diffusion_tests/mpi_tests/
mpirun -np 4 pytest -v -s --with-mpi --datatest model/common/tests/mpi_tests/
```

Commit message:

update installation requirement text and readme in model package

model/README.md, after:

# ICON4Py Model

This folder contains Python implementations for multiple ICON components.

It includes the following packages:

- `atmosphere/dycore`: Contains implementations of the dynamical core of the ICON model
- `atmosphere/diffusion`: Contains the implementation of diffusion in the ICON model
- `atmosphere/advection`: Contains implementations of the advection component of the ICON model
- `atmosphere/subgrid_scale_physics/microphysics`: Contains implementations of the microphysics component of the ICON model
- `common`: Contains shared functionality that is required by multiple components.
- `driver`: Contains the driving code for the model

## Installation Instructions

You can follow the general installation instructions used for the entire icon4py repository, or install each namespace package within this folder independently using the individual folder-specific `requirements.txt` or `requirements-dev.txt` files.

In the following example it is assumed that you have already created and activated a virtual environment.

```bash
# changing into the corresponding directory
cd model/atmosphere/dycore
cd model/atmosphere/advection

# installing a development version
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

**Note**: For more information specific to each component, please refer to the README in their respective subfolders.

### Testing

See the repository [README](../README.md) for general information.

#### Unit tests for stencils
The `gt4py` stencils in the `icon4py-model` packages are used for integration into Fortran code
via [icon4pygen](../tools/src/icon4py/icon4pygen). To make integration easier
unit tests for the stencils need to be placed into
a `stencil_tests` subfolder of the packages test path. For example
```
model/atmosphere/diffusion/tests/stencil_tests
model/atmosphere/dycore/tests/stencil_tests
model/atmosphere/advection/tests/stencil_tests
model/common/tests/tests/stencil_tests
```

#### Data dependent tests

Some test depend on serialized data generated by a full model run. 
Those test are marked with `pytest.mark.datatest` and are only run when the `--datatest` 
option is specified. Note that due to `pytests` configuration discovery 
you need to specify the base a package directory i.e. one that contains a `pyproject.toml` for the 
commandline option to work.

```bash

pytest -v --datatest model/common
pytest -v --datatest model/atmosphere/diffusion
```

#### Testing parallel code
Icon4Py uses GHEX as communication library. It is an optional dependency of the model. In order to install and
run the parallel version do the following:

1. You need to have a MPI installation in your system, so do the following

```bash
sudo apt-get install libopenmpi-dev
```
or
```bash
sudo apt-get install mpich
```
On MacOS run 
```bash
brew install mpich
```
2. Install optional python libraries:
In the main folder of the repository run
```bash
pip install -r requirements-dev-opt.txt
```
Note that the current Python build for GHEX seems not to run on MacOS.

3. Run parallel tests
In order to run the parallel tests you need to specify specify the `--with-mpi` option to `pytest`
and _pass the exact folder location of the tests_ to `pytest`.


```bash
mpirun -np 4 pytest -v -s --with-mpi --datatest model/atmosphere/diffusion/diffusion_tests/mpi_tests/
mpirun -np 4 pytest -v -s --with-mpi --datatest model/common/tests/mpi_tests/
```
